# Cryptocurrency
Thanks to this 3Blue1Brown [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bBC-nXj3Ng4&t=1153s).

## Basics of Blocks
A nice [basic explanation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSo_EIwHSd4).

- A block contains 3 things: data, hash (unique ID key), hash of previous block.
  - Data may be a record of a transaction.
  - A hash is determined by the contents of the data. Wait, so then wouldn't two identical transactions get the same hash key? Maybe they also have a timestamp.
- Changing block 2 will make all following blocks INVALID.
  - But what about just generating a bunch of new hashes?
  - Add a *proof-of-work* mechanism: takes a long time to create a new block.
- Blockchains are also *distributed*, so that anyone in the network gets a full copy of the block chain, and *consensus* determines which blocks are VALID.


## How you might create one
A lovely walkthrough from 3Blue1Brown.

### Security and signatures
- Everyone has a pair of keys: public and secret.  
- To create a message, there is a function from your secret key and your message to an encoded message, or `digital signature`.
- 256-bit security is insane: we have a complementary Verify function that takes in message, signature (encoded message), and public key. It is *very* unlikely that you could find this signature by brute force, without knowing the private key "associated with" the public key (how are they associated???)
- I think he deals with the timestamp problem by requiring every line on the ledger to have its own ID.

### Trust for payment
- Make everyone put in money up front, and don't let them spend more than they have. (But that's not really how it works.)
- So, verifying a transaction means knowing the whole history of transactions.
- The quantities on the ledger count as "Ledger Dollars"; but they are unhinged from real US dollars.
- Bitcoin essentially is a ledger; the history of transactions is the currency.

### Decentralization
- Decentralized: everyone has a copy of the ledger.
- The real problem: what protocol do you set up so that anyone following it is sure to have the same exact ledger, with lines in the same order?

### Hash functions
- Main idea: trust the ledger with the most computational work behind it.
- Output is 256 bits (`SHA 256`); always gives same output for a given input, but small change in input makes the output change radically, unpredictably.
- A "cryptographic" hash function is such that finding the inverse function is *infeasible* without using brute force.
- There's no proof of this -- but no one has found the way to find the inverse.
- Great visualization for how crazy that amount of computation would be.

### Proof of work
- Take a ledger, and append a number to end of it, which is such that the SHA-256 output starts with X number of zeros (say 30 zeros).
- So it's easy to verify that they went through that work.
- So if you alter the list, you need to do a lot of computations.
- So each block is really a history of transactions PLUS a proof of work number.
- Also make it contain the hash of its previous block, so we can get an *order*.
- Instead of calling it a ledger, we call it a `block chain`.

### Generating Value
- Anyone can create blocks, by listening for broadcasted transactions and finding a number that makes the hash start with X zeros.
- Block creators are *rewarded*: the creator gets Y dollars out of thin air.
- So each block makes every "coin" worth less; this is `mining`.
- Every instance of 'mining' is like a miniature lottery: whoever finds the number first wins the reward.
- For anyone just using the system, they just listen for the broadcast of new blocks being generated by miners.
- Key addition: if you hear two different histories, defer to the longest one -- the one that required most computation.
- The real juice is that a fraudulent-chain-maker would have to make the blocks faster than all of the other miners on the network *combined* -- so they would need more than 50% of the computing power on the network to make it feasible.

### Design Choices
- Bitcoin has a `block time` of about 10 minutes, so that it will take a network of miners about 10 minutes to find the new number.
- Other currencies may choose different block times.
- Bitcoin reduces the reward based on how many coins have been mined -- so the amount of coins in existence won't ever exceed a certain amount.
- In bitcoin, each block is limited to about 2400 transactions. So transactors have reason to incentivize miners to mine *their* transactions, and include them in their ledgers. Wait, does this mean their transactions have a chance of not being recorded???
- Yeah that seems to be the implication: creates incentive for transactors to make *large* transactions, to attract miners. Huh.

## A more ambitious take
Pretty typical [ted talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pl8OlkkwRpc).

- CC as a "native medium for value"
- contra to a "fiat currency" created by a nation-state
- Hmm talk of "changing democracy" seems a bit under-thought.
- then he talks about land-ownership being block-chained and becoming "unhackable", creating prosperity for millions...Something feels off
- reminiscent of *The Circle*
